how express and admirable; in action how like
 an angel, in apprehension how like a god: the
 beauty of the world, the paragon of animals—and
 yet, to me, what is this quintessence of dust? Man
 delights not me,  no,  nor women neither, though by
 your smiling you seem to say so.
  My lord, there was no such stuff in my
 thoughts.
  Why did you laugh, then, when I said “man
 delights not me”?
  To think, my lord, if you delight not in
 man, what Lenten entertainment the players shall
 receive from you. We coted them on the way, and
 hither are they coming to offer you service.
  He that plays the king shall be welcome—his
 Majesty shall have tribute on me. The adventurous
 knight shall use his foil and target, the lover shall
 not sigh gratis, the humorous man shall end his
 part in peace,  the clown shall make those laugh
 whose lungs are  tickle  o’ th’ sear,  and the lady
 shall say her mind freely, or the  blank  verse shall
 halt for ’t. What players are they?
  Even those you were wont to take such
 delight in, the tragedians of the city.
  How chances it they travel? Their residence,
 both in reputation and profit, was better both ways.
  I think their inhibition comes by the
 means of the late innovation.
  Do they hold the same estimation they did
 when I was in the city? Are they so followed?
  No, indeed are they not.
  How comes it? Do they grow rusty?
  Nay, their endeavor keeps in the wonted
 pace. But there is, sir, an aerie of children, little
 eyases, that cry out on the top of question and are
 most tyrannically clapped for ’t. These are now the
A flourish  for the Players.
 fashion and so  berattle  the common stages (so
 they call them) that many wearing rapiers are afraid
 of goose quills and dare scarce come thither.
  What, are they children? Who maintains ’em?
 How are they escoted? Will they pursue the quality
 no longer than they can sing? Will they not say
 afterwards, if they should grow themselves to common
 players (as it is  most like,  if their means are
 no better), their writers do them wrong to make
 them exclaim against their own succession?
  Faith, there has been much  to-do  on
 both sides, and the nation holds it no sin to tar
 them to controversy. There was for a while no
 money bid for argument unless the poet and the
 player went to cuffs in the question.
  Is ’t possible?
  O, there has been much throwing
 about of brains.
  Do the boys carry it away?
  Ay, that they do, my lord—Hercules
 and his load too.
  It is not very strange; for my uncle is King of
 Denmark, and those that would make mouths at
 him while my father lived give twenty, forty, fifty,
 a hundred ducats apiece for his picture in little.
 ’Sblood, there is something in this more than natural,
 if philosophy could find it out.
  There are the players.
  Gentlemen, you are welcome to Elsinore.
 Your hands, come then. Th’ appurtenance of welcome
 is fashion and ceremony. Let me comply
 with you in this garb,  lest my  extent to the players,
 which, I tell you, must show fairly outwards, should
 more appear like entertainment than yours. You are
 welcome. But my uncle-father and aunt-mother are
 deceived.
  In what, my dear lord?
  I am but mad north-north-west. When the
 wind is southerly, I know a hawk from a handsaw.
Enter Polonius.
  Well be with you, gentlemen.
  Hark you, Guildenstern, and you too—at
 each ear a hearer! That great baby you see there is
 not yet out of his swaddling clouts.
  Haply he is the second time come to
 them, for they say an old man is twice a child.
  I will prophesy he comes to tell me of the
 players; mark it.—You say right, sir, a Monday
 morning, ’twas then indeed.
  My lord, I have news to tell you.
  My lord, I have news to tell you: when Roscius
 was an actor in Rome—
  The actors are come hither, my lord.
  Buzz, buzz.
  Upon my honor—
  Then came each actor on his ass.
  The best actors in the world, either for
 tragedy, comedy, history, pastoral, pastoral-comical,
 historical-pastoral,  tragical-historical,
 tragical-comical-historical-pastoral,  scene individable, or
 poem unlimited. Seneca cannot be too heavy, nor
 Plautus too light. For the law of writ and the liberty,
 these are the only men.
  O Jephthah, judge of Israel, what a treasure
 hadst thou!
  What a treasure had he, my lord?
  Why,
 One fair daughter, and no more,
 The which he lovèd passing well.
,  aside   Still on my daughter.
  Am I not i’ th’ right, old Jephthah?
